src/content/docs/guides/forms/form-groups.mdx, before:

---
title: Form Groups
description: Learn how to grouping fields and slice forms into smaller parts
sidebar:
  order: 2
---

import { Aside, Tabs, TabItem } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

import MdxRepl from '@components/MdxRepl.vue';

import Kbd from '@components/KeyboardKey.vue';

import TextFieldPartial from '../fields/_partials/_textField.mdx';
import CheckboxPartial from '../fields/_partials/_checkbox.mdx';
import FieldsetPartial from './_partials/_fieldset.mdx';
import GroupPartial from './_partials/_group.mdx';

Form groups are a way to structure related fields in a form. They allow you to group fields together and slice forms into smaller parts. This can be useful for organizing forms with many fields, or for creating reusable group components that may be added to multiple forms.

That's their main purpose, to slice forms into manageable parts. They are not nested forms, they do not submit data on their own, they are just a way to group fields together in a parent form.

## Creating a Form Group

To create a form group, you can use the `useFormGroup` composable. Just like fields, the `useFormGroup` composable returns values that should be bound to the anatomy elements.

Typically, you need to create a `FormGroup` component that you can use to structure your form fields. You can use `fieldset` as a base element for your `FormGroup` component or any other element that you prefer.

Form groups require a `name` prop which will be used to nest the fields values in the form data. In the next examples, fill out the data and submit the form to see how the form data are structured.

### With a fieldset element

<MdxRepl preview-size="lg" client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="FormGroup.vue">
  <FieldsetPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { useForm } from '@formwerk/core';
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
import FormGroup from './FormGroup.vue';

const { handleSubmit } = useForm();

const onSubmit = handleSubmit((data) => {
  alert(JSON.stringify(data.toJSON(), null, 2));
});
</script>

<template>
  <form @submit="onSubmit" novalidate>
    <TextField name="email" label="Email" type="email" required />

    <FormGroup name="shipping" label="Shipping information">
      <TextField name="address" label="Address" required />
      <TextField name="city" label="City" required />
      <TextField name="zip" label="ZIP" required />
    </FormGroup>

    <button type="submit">Submit</button>
  </form>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

Naturally, styling is entirely up to you. This can be much easier with another HTML elements like `div` as shown in the next section.

### With any HTML element

You can use any HTML element to create a form group. Formwerk's `useFormGroup` bindings automatically change based on the element that is bound to it to ensure users get a consistent experience regardless of what element you choose to use.

Here's an example using a `div` element:

<MdxRepl preview-size="lg" client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="FormGroup.vue">
  <GroupPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { useForm } from '@formwerk/core';
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
import FormGroup from './FormGroup.vue';

const { handleSubmit } = useForm();

const onSubmit = handleSubmit((data) => {
  alert(JSON.stringify(data.toJSON(), null, 2));
});
</script>

<template>
  <form @submit="onSubmit" novalidate>
    <TextField name="email" label="Email" type="email" required />

    <FormGroup name="shipping" label="Shipping information">
      <TextField name="address" label="Address" required />
      <TextField name="city" label="City" required />
      <TextField name="zip" label="ZIP" required />
    </FormGroup>

    <button type="submit">Submit</button>
  </form>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## Validation

The form guide mentioned briefly that groups can have their own validation Typed schema just like forms do. They do not override the parent form schema, they are just an extension of it.

Formwerk prioritizes the validation sources in the following order:

1. **HTML Constraints** are checked first, only if they are valid continue to the next step.
2. **Field-level** Typed Schema is checked next, only if it is valid continue to the next step.
3. **Group-level** Typed Schema is checked next, only if it is valid continue to the next step.
4. **Form-level** Typed Schema is checked last.

<MdxRepl preview-size="lg" client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="!FormGroup.vue">
  <GroupPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { useForm } from '@formwerk/core';
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
import FormGroup from './FormGroup.vue';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import { z } from 'zod';

const shippingSchema = defineSchema(
  z.object({
    address: z.string().min(5),
    city: z.string().min(3),
    zip: z.string().length(5),
  }),
);

const schema = defineSchema(
  z.object({
    email: z.string().email(),
  }),
);

const { handleSubmit } = useForm({
  schema,
});

const onSubmit = handleSubmit((data) => {
  alert(JSON.stringify(data.toJSON(), null, 2));
});
</script>

<template>
  <form @submit="onSubmit" novalidate>
    <TextField name="email" label="Email" />

    <FormGroup
      name="shipping"
      label="Shipping information"
      :schema="shippingSchema"
    >
      <TextField name="address" label="Address" />
      <TextField name="city" label="City" />
      <TextField name="zip" label="ZIP" />
    </FormGroup>

    <button type="submit">Submit</button>
  </form>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

<Aside>

Even tho the group can have its own validation schema, it only acts as a liaison between the fields and the form schema. The form still tracks the fields, their validity and their values.

</Aside>

## Group state

The group tracks and aggregates the fields state that are part of it. The follow states are an aggregation of the fields that are part of the group:

| Name        | Type    | Description                                                                 |
| ----------- | ------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `isDirty`   | Boolean | Indicates whether any field within the group has been modified.             |
| `isValid`   | Boolean | Indicates whether all fields within the group pass their validation checks. |
| `isTouched` | Boolean | Indicates whether any field within the group has been interacted with.      |

It also exposes the following getters and functions:

| Name           | Type                                  | Description                                                                     |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `getErrors`    | () => TypedError[]                    | Returns all errors within the group.                                            |
| `getValues`    | () => Record\<string, any>            | Returns all values within the group.                                            |
| `getError`     | (name: string) => string \| undefined | Returns the error for a given field within the group.                           |
| `displayError` | (name: string) => string \| undefined | Displays the error for a given field within the group if the field was touched. |
| `validate`     | () => Promise                         | Validates all fields within the group.                                          |

## Group Names and Nested Paths

A group can accept a `name` prop which will prefix all the field names nested under it with that same name.

This means also when submitting the form, the data will be nested under the group name.

<MdxRepl preview-size="lg" client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="!FormGroup.vue">
  <GroupPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { useForm } from '@formwerk/core';
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
import FormGroup from './FormGroup.vue';

const { handleSubmit } = useForm();

const onSubmit = handleSubmit((data) => {
  alert(JSON.stringify(data.toJSON(), null, 2));
});
</script>

<template>
  <form @submit="onSubmit" novalidate>
    <TextField name="field" label="Not Nested" />

    <FormGroup name="group-1" label="Group 1">
      <TextField name="field" label="Field 1 - Group 1" />
    </FormGroup>

    <FormGroup name="group-2" label="Group 2">
      <TextField name="field" label="Field 1 - Group 2" />
    </FormGroup>

    <button type="submit">Submit</button>
  </form>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## API

### Props

These are the properties that can be passed to the `useFormGroup` composable.

| Name                  | Type                     | Description                                                                   |
| --------------------- | ------------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| name                  | `string` (optional)      | The name of the form group, if provided field names will be prefixed with it. |
| label                 | `string`                 | The label for the form group.                                                 |
| schema                | `TypedSchema` (optional) | The validation schema for the form group.                                     |
| disableHtmlValidation | `boolean` (optional)     | Whether to disable HTML5 validation for fields within the form group.         |

### Returns

| Name           | Type                                    | Description                                                                |
| -------------- | --------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `labelProps`   | `Object`                                | Props to be spread on the label element.                                   |
| `groupProps`   | `Object`                                | Props to be spread on the group container element.                         |
| `isDirty`      | `ComputedRef<boolean>`                  | Whether any field in the group has been modified.                          |
| `isValid`      | `ComputedRef<boolean>`                  | Whether all fields in the group are valid.                                 |
| `isTouched`    | `ComputedRef<boolean>`                  | Whether any field in the group has been touched.                           |
| `getErrors`    | `() => TypedError[]`                    | Function to get all errors in the group.                                   |
| `getValues`    | `() => Record<string, any>`             | Function to get all values in the group.                                   |
| `getError`     | `(name: string) => string \| undefined` | Function to get the error for a specific field in the group.               |
| `displayError` | `(name: string) => string \| undefined` | Function to display the error for a specific field if it has been touched. |
| `validate`     | `() => Promise<void>`                   | Function to validate all fields in the group.                              |

Commit message:

feat: kill typed schema guides

src/content/docs/guides/forms/form-groups.mdx, after:

---
title: Form Groups
description: Learn how to grouping fields and slice forms into smaller parts
sidebar:
  order: 2
---

import { Aside, Tabs, TabItem } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

import MdxRepl from '@components/MdxRepl.vue';

import Kbd from '@components/KeyboardKey.vue';

import TextFieldPartial from '../fields/_partials/_textField.mdx';
import CheckboxPartial from '../fields/_partials/_checkbox.mdx';
import FieldsetPartial from './_partials/_fieldset.mdx';
import GroupPartial from './_partials/_group.mdx';

Form groups are a way to structure related fields in a form. They allow you to group fields together and slice forms into smaller parts. This can be useful for organizing forms with many fields, or for creating reusable group components that may be added to multiple forms.

That's their main purpose, to slice forms into manageable parts. They are not nested forms, they do not submit data on their own, they are just a way to group fields together in a parent form.

## Creating a Form Group

To create a form group, you can use the `useFormGroup` composable. Just like fields, the `useFormGroup` composable returns values that should be bound to the anatomy elements.

Typically, you need to create a `FormGroup` component that you can use to structure your form fields. You can use `fieldset` as a base element for your `FormGroup` component or any other element that you prefer.

Form groups require a `name` prop which will be used to nest the fields values in the form data. In the next examples, fill out the data and submit the form to see how the form data are structured.

### With a fieldset element

<MdxRepl preview-size="lg" client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="FormGroup.vue">
  <FieldsetPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { useForm } from '@formwerk/core';
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
import FormGroup from './FormGroup.vue';

const { handleSubmit } = useForm();

const onSubmit = handleSubmit((data) => {
  alert(JSON.stringify(data.toJSON(), null, 2));
});
</script>

<template>
  <form @submit="onSubmit" novalidate>
    <TextField name="email" label="Email" type="email" required />

    <FormGroup name="shipping" label="Shipping information">
      <TextField name="address" label="Address" required />
      <TextField name="city" label="City" required />
      <TextField name="zip" label="ZIP" required />
    </FormGroup>

    <button type="submit">Submit</button>
  </form>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

Naturally, styling is entirely up to you. This can be much easier with another HTML elements like `div` as shown in the next section.

### With any HTML element

You can use any HTML element to create a form group. Formwerk's `useFormGroup` bindings automatically change based on the element that is bound to it to ensure users get a consistent experience regardless of what element you choose to use.

Here's an example using a `div` element:

<MdxRepl preview-size="lg" client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="FormGroup.vue">
  <GroupPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { useForm } from '@formwerk/core';
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
import FormGroup from './FormGroup.vue';

const { handleSubmit } = useForm();

const onSubmit = handleSubmit((data) => {
  alert(JSON.stringify(data.toJSON(), null, 2));
});
</script>

<template>
  <form @submit="onSubmit" novalidate>
    <TextField name="email" label="Email" type="email" required />

    <FormGroup name="shipping" label="Shipping information">
      <TextField name="address" label="Address" required />
      <TextField name="city" label="City" required />
      <TextField name="zip" label="ZIP" required />
    </FormGroup>

    <button type="submit">Submit</button>
  </form>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## Validation

The form guide mentioned briefly that groups can have their own validation [Standard Schema](https://github.com/standard-schema/standard-schema) just like forms do. They do not override the parent form schema, they are just an extension of it.

Formwerk prioritizes the validation sources in the following order:

1. **HTML Constraints** are checked first, only if they are valid continue to the next step.
2. **Field-level's** Standard Schema is checked next, only if it is valid continue to the next step.
3. **Group-level's** Standard Schema is checked next, only if it is valid continue to the next step.
4. **Form-level's** Standard Schema is checked last.

<MdxRepl preview-size="lg" client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="!FormGroup.vue">
  <GroupPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { useForm } from '@formwerk/core';
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
import FormGroup from './FormGroup.vue';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import { z } from 'zod';

const shippingSchema = defineSchema(
  z.object({
    address: z.string().min(5),
    city: z.string().min(3),
    zip: z.string().length(5),
  }),
);

const schema = defineSchema(
  z.object({
    email: z.string().email(),
  }),
);

const { handleSubmit } = useForm({
  schema,
});

const onSubmit = handleSubmit((data) => {
  alert(JSON.stringify(data.toJSON(), null, 2));
});
</script>

<template>
  <form @submit="onSubmit" novalidate>
    <TextField name="email" label="Email" />

    <FormGroup
      name="shipping"
      label="Shipping information"
      :schema="shippingSchema"
    >
      <TextField name="address" label="Address" />
      <TextField name="city" label="City" />
      <TextField name="zip" label="ZIP" />
    </FormGroup>

    <button type="submit">Submit</button>
  </form>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

<Aside>

Even tho the group can have its own validation schema, it only acts as a liaison between the fields and the form schema. The form still tracks the fields, their validity and their values.

</Aside>

## Group state

The group tracks and aggregates the fields state that are part of it. The follow states are an aggregation of the fields that are part of the group:

| Name        | Type    | Description                                                                 |
| ----------- | ------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `isDirty`   | Boolean | Indicates whether any field within the group has been modified.             |
| `isValid`   | Boolean | Indicates whether all fields within the group pass their validation checks. |
| `isTouched` | Boolean | Indicates whether any field within the group has been interacted with.      |

It also exposes the following getters and functions:

| Name           | Type                                  | Description                                                                     |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `getErrors`    | () => IssueCollection[]               | Returns all errors within the group.                                            |
| `getValues`    | () => Record\<string, any>            | Returns all values within the group.                                            |
| `getError`     | (name: string) => string \| undefined | Returns the error for a given field within the group.                           |
| `displayError` | (name: string) => string \| undefined | Displays the error for a given field within the group if the field was touched. |
| `validate`     | () => Promise                         | Validates all fields within the group.                                          |

## Group Names and Nested Paths

A group can accept a `name` prop which will prefix all the field names nested under it with that same name.

This means also when submitting the form, the data will be nested under the group name.

<MdxRepl preview-size="lg" client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="!FormGroup.vue">
  <GroupPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { useForm } from '@formwerk/core';
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
import FormGroup from './FormGroup.vue';

const { handleSubmit } = useForm();

const onSubmit = handleSubmit((data) => {
  alert(JSON.stringify(data.toJSON(), null, 2));
});
</script>

<template>
  <form @submit="onSubmit" novalidate>
    <TextField name="field" label="Not Nested" />

    <FormGroup name="group-1" label="Group 1">
      <TextField name="field" label="Field 1 - Group 1" />
    </FormGroup>

    <FormGroup name="group-2" label="Group 2">
      <TextField name="field" label="Field 1 - Group 2" />
    </FormGroup>

    <button type="submit">Submit</button>
  </form>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## API

### Props

These are the properties that can be passed to the `useFormGroup` composable.

| Name                  | Type                        | Description                                                                   |
| --------------------- | --------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| name                  | `string` (optional)         | The name of the form group, if provided field names will be prefixed with it. |
| label                 | `string`                    | The label for the form group.                                                 |
| schema                | `StandardSchema` (optional) | The validation schema for the form group.                                     |
| disableHtmlValidation | `boolean` (optional)        | Whether to disable HTML5 validation for fields within the form group.         |

### Returns

| Name           | Type                                    | Description                                                                |
| -------------- | --------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `labelProps`   | `Object`                                | Props to be spread on the label element.                                   |
| `groupProps`   | `Object`                                | Props to be spread on the group container element.                         |
| `isDirty`      | `ComputedRef<boolean>`                  | Whether any field in the group has been modified.                          |
| `isValid`      | `ComputedRef<boolean>`                  | Whether all fields in the group are valid.                                 |
| `isTouched`    | `ComputedRef<boolean>`                  | Whether any field in the group has been touched.                           |
| `getErrors`    | `() => IssueCollection[]`               | Function to get all errors in the group.                                   |
| `getValues`    | `() => Record<string, any>`             | Function to get all values in the group.                                   |
| `getError`     | `(name: string) => string \| undefined` | Function to get the error for a specific field in the group.               |
| `displayError` | `(name: string) => string \| undefined` | Function to display the error for a specific field if it has been touched. |
| `validate`     | `() => Promise<void>`                   | Function to validate all fields in the group.                              |
