src/content/docs/guides/fields/number-fields.mdx, before:

---
title: Number Field
description: Learn how to build accessible and i18n-ready number field Vue components with Formwerk.
sidebar:
  order: 2
---

import { Tabs, TabItem, Aside } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import AnatomyCanvas from '@components/AnatomyCanvas.vue';
import AnatomyNumberField from '@components/AnatomyNumberField.vue';
import MdxRepl from '@components/MdxRepl.vue';
import Kbd from '@components/KeyboardKey.vue';
import MouseWheel from '@components/MouseWheel.vue';

import NumberFieldPartial from './_partials/_numberField.mdx';

Number fields are a common field in many forms. They include built-in validation to reject non-numerical input. Additionally, the browser may provide stepper arrows to let the user increase and decrease the value with a configurable step amount.

The Number field is usually used for number values rather than numeric values. For example while a credit card number is numeric, you should not use a number field for it. Instead you should use it for values that are meant to be consumed as a number like units, prices and percentages.

The native HTML number input and most other implementations do not offer a good experience. Here are a couple of common issues:

- **Lack of proper internationalization:** Mainly, the lack of support for other numeral systems like the Arabic numerals `(٠١٢٣٤٥٦٧٨٩)` are a pain to work with. Users often have to switch keyboard languages/layout to enter numbers and even then it is not perfect. Keyboards don't always have all the necessary characters for decimals and thousands separators. This means the number input is not accessible for the global audience.
- **No formatting support:** this includes grouping `,` and displaying units and currencies and other simple masking features.

Formwerk tries to address all these issues and more by utilizing the `Intl.NumberFormat` API. It provides a solid foundation for building number fields that are accessible and easy to use for users all over the world.

## Features

- Supports using the `input` element as a base with `type="text"` (don't worry, we add the `inputmode` automatically for accessability and mobile keyboards).
- Labeling, descriptions, error message displays are automatically linked to input and label elements with `aria-*` attributes.
- Formatting and parsing numbers with the `Intl.NumberFormat` API depending on the site locale or the user's preferred language.
- Support for multiple numeral systems (Latin, Arabic, and Chinese).
- Support for `Intl.NumberFormat` units and currencies.
- Support for the [Spinbutton ARIA pattern](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/spinbutton/) for increment/decrement buttons.
- Support for `min`, `max` and `step` attributes.
- Validation support with native HTML constraint validation or Typed schemas.
- Rejects non-numerical input characters and any incoming key presses that would make the number invalid.
- Support for `v-model` binding.
- Supported Keyboard features:

| Key                                            | Description                                                          |
| ---------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| <Kbd code="ArrowUp" label="Arrow Up" />        | increment the value by the step amount.                              |
| <Kbd code="ArrowDown" label="Arrow Down"/>     | decrement the value by the step amount.                              |
| <Kbd code="PageUp" label="Page Up" />          | increment the value by larger multiple of the step amount.           |
| <Kbd code="PageDown" label="Page Down" />      | decrement the value by larger multiple of the step amount.           |
| <Kbd code="Home" />                            | set the value to the min value if provided, otherwise has no effect. |
| <Kbd code="End" />                             | set the value to the max value if provided, otherwise has no effect. |
| <MouseWheel class="size-6" direction="up" />   | increment the value by the step amount.                              |
| <MouseWheel class="size-6" direction="down" /> | decrement the value by the step amount.                              |

## Anatomy

<AnatomyCanvas>
  <AnatomyNumberField />
</AnatomyCanvas>

## Building a Number Field Component

You can start by importing the `useNumberField` composable and using it in your number field component.

The `useNumberField` composable returns binding objects for the elements shown in the [anatomy](#anatomy), you will use `v-bind` to bind them to the corresponding DOM elements.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';

const count = ref(5);
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField label="Count" v-model="count" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

Notice that we imported the `NumberFieldProps` in the previous example. This is recommended to use as your component prop types. Not only you get type safety for your component out of it but also it handles the reactivity aspects of the props so you don't have to. You are free to extend it with your own props or omit the ones you don't need.

## Validation

### HTML Constraints

You can use native HTML validation or Typed schemas to validate the number field. The following properties are supported:

| Name       | Type      | Description                             |
| ---------- | --------- | --------------------------------------- |
| `max`      | `number`  | The maximum value for the number field. |
| `min`      | `number`  | The minimum value for the number field. |
| `required` | `boolean` | Whether the number field is required.   |
| `step`     | `number`  | The step amount for the number field.   |

<Aside>
  Note that `min`, `max` and `step` attributes accept a number or a string, the
  string however must be parseable as a number. Formwerk takes care of typing
  strings safely and parsing them so you don't have to bind the values as
  numbers.
</Aside>

Here is an example of how to use the `max` and `min` properties to limit the number field value between 0 and 100.

Assuming you have a `NumberField` component like the one shown above, you can use it like this:

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';

const value = ref(26);
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField
    v-model="value"
    label="Amount"
    max="50"
    min="0"
    step="2"
    required
  />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Typed Schema

`useNumberField` also supports Typed Schema validation through the `schema` prop.

<Aside>

Depending on the schema validation provider you are using, the API might slightly differ. Check the supported validation providers for more information. In this example we are using the `zod` schema validation provider.

</Aside>

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(
  z
    .number('Required')
    .min(1, 'Must be greater than 0')
    .max(14, 'Must be less than 14'),
);
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField label="Number" :schema="schema" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Mixed Validation

While it is unlikely that you need both HTML constraints and Typed schemas to validate a number field, Formwerk supports mixed validation, which means you can use both HTML constraints and Typed schemas to validate the field and define step amount and min/max values and they work seamlessly together.

Note that HTML constraints are validated first, so any errors from the HTML constraints will be displayed first. Then once all HTML constraints are satisfied, the typed schema is validated.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(z.number().min(1).max(10));
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField label="Number" :schema="schema" max="50" min="0" step="2" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## Usage

### Disabled

Use disabled to mark fields as non-interactive, disabled fields are not validated and are not submitted.

If you need to prevent the user from interacting with the field while still allowing it to submit, consider using `readonly` instead.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField label="Disabled" disabled />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Readonly

Readonly fields are validated and submitted, but they do not accept user input. The field is still focusable and the value is copyable. For more info, check the [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/readonly).

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField label="Readonly" value="47" readonly />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Formatting and Units

You can use the `formatOptions` prop to format the number field value. It accepts all [options](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/NumberFormat/NumberFormat#options) that are supported by the `Intl.NumberFormat` API.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';

const value = ref(1000);
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField
    label="Amount"
    v-model="value"
    step="100"
    :formatOptions="{ style: 'currency', currency: 'USD' }"
  />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### i18n

Aside from [formatting](#formatting-and-units) you can also use any numeral system supported by the `Intl.NumberFormat` API. Like Arabic, and Chinese.

The number field also accepts a `locale` prop to change the locale of the number field. Usually you should not want to pass it manually but for demonstration purposes it is shown below.

Actually, here are 3 fields each with a different numeral system bound to the same value, and you get the parsed value with either of them.

<MdxRepl client:load preview-size="lg">

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';

const value = ref(10);
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField label="Latin" v-model="value" />
  <NumberField label="Arabic" v-model="value" locale="ar-EG" />
  <NumberField label="Chinese" v-model="value" locale="zh-cn-u-nu-hanidec" />

  value is: {{ value }}
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### RTL

The number field doesn't really need much for RTL support, however the `dir` prop can be used to set the direction of the field for convenience.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField label="Amount" value="10" dir="rtl" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

<Aside>

There is a lot more to directionality and localization, for more info check out the [i18n guide](/guides/extras/i18n).

</Aside>

## API

### Props

These are the properties that can be passed to the `useNumberField` composable.

| Name                    | Type                        | Description                                 |
| ----------------------- | --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| `label`                 | `string`                    | The label for the number field.             |
| `locale`                | `string?`                   | The locale to use for formatting.           |
| `modelValue`            | `number?`                   | The v-model value for the number field.     |
| `description`           | `string?`                   | Description text for the number field.      |
| `incrementLabel`        | `string?`                   | Label for the increment button.             |
| `decrementLabel`        | `string?`                   | Label for the decrement button.             |
| `name`                  | `string?`                   | The name attribute for the input element.   |
| `value`                 | `Numberish?`                | The initial value of the number field.      |
| `min`                   | `Numberish?`                | The minimum allowed value.                  |
| `max`                   | `Numberish?`                | The maximum allowed value.                  |
| `step`                  | `Numberish?`                | The step value for increments/decrements.   |
| `placeholder`           | `string?`                   | Placeholder text for the input.             |
| `required`              | `boolean?`                  | Whether the field is required.              |
| `readonly`              | `boolean?`                  | Whether the field is read-only.             |
| `disabled`              | `boolean?`                  | Whether the field is disabled.              |
| `formatOptions`         | `Intl.NumberFormatOptions?` | Options for number formatting.              |
| `schema`                | `TypedSchema<number>?`      | Schema for validation.                      |
| `disableWheel`          | `boolean?`                  | Whether to disable the wheel event handler. |
| `disableHtmlValidation` | `boolean?`                  | Whether to disable HTML5 validation.        |

<Aside>
  Most of the props above can be passed as `Ref<T>` or `() => T` and the reactivity will be handled for you.
</Aside>

### Returns

These are the properties in the object returned by the `useNumberField` composable.

| Name                   | Type                               | Description                                                         |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `decrement`            | `() => void`                       | Decreases the number value by the step amount.                      |
| `decrementButtonProps` | Complex Binding                    | The decrement button element's props.                               |
| `descriptionProps`     | `AriaDescriptionProps`             | The description element's props.                                    |
| `displayError`         | `() => string \| undefined`        | A getter to display the error message if touched.                   |
| `errorMessage`         | `string \| undefined`              | The validation message.                                             |
| `errorMessageProps`    | `AriaErrorMessageProps`            | The error message element props.                                    |
| `errors`               | `string[]`                         | The field's error messages.                                         |
| `fieldValue`           | `number \| undefined`              | The current value of the field.                                     |
| `increment`            | `() => void`                       | Increases the number value by the step amount.                      |
| `incrementButtonProps` | Complex Binding                    | The increment button element's props.                               |
| `inputProps`           | Complex Binding                    | The base element props.                                             |
| `isDirty`              | `boolean`                          | Whether the field value has changed.                                |
| `isTouched`            | `boolean`                          | Whether the field is touched.                                       |
| `isValid`              | `boolean`                          | Whether the field has error messages.                               |
| `labelProps`           | `AriaLabelProps`                   | The label element props.                                            |
| `setErrors`            | `(msg: Arrayable<string>) => void` | Sets the error messages for the field and sets the `isValid` state. |
| `setTouched`           | `(touched: boolean) => void`       | Sets the `isTouched` state.                                         |
| `setValue`             | `(value: number) => void`          | Sets the field's current value.                                     |

Commit message:

feat: kill typed schema guides

src/content/docs/guides/fields/number-fields.mdx, after:

---
title: Number Field
description: Learn how to build accessible and i18n-ready number field Vue components with Formwerk.
sidebar:
  order: 2
---

import { Tabs, TabItem, Aside } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import AnatomyCanvas from '@components/AnatomyCanvas.vue';
import AnatomyNumberField from '@components/AnatomyNumberField.vue';
import MdxRepl from '@components/MdxRepl.vue';
import Kbd from '@components/KeyboardKey.vue';
import MouseWheel from '@components/MouseWheel.vue';

import NumberFieldPartial from './_partials/_numberField.mdx';

Number fields are a common field in many forms. They include built-in validation to reject non-numerical input. Additionally, the browser may provide stepper arrows to let the user increase and decrease the value with a configurable step amount.

The Number field is usually used for number values rather than numeric values. For example while a credit card number is numeric, you should not use a number field for it. Instead you should use it for values that are meant to be consumed as a number like units, prices and percentages.

The native HTML number input and most other implementations do not offer a good experience. Here are a couple of common issues:

- **Lack of proper internationalization:** Mainly, the lack of support for other numeral systems like the Arabic numerals `(٠١٢٣٤٥٦٧٨٩)` are a pain to work with. Users often have to switch keyboard languages/layout to enter numbers and even then it is not perfect. Keyboards don't always have all the necessary characters for decimals and thousands separators. This means the number input is not accessible for the global audience.
- **No formatting support:** this includes grouping `,` and displaying units and currencies and other simple masking features.

Formwerk tries to address all these issues and more by utilizing the `Intl.NumberFormat` API. It provides a solid foundation for building number fields that are accessible and easy to use for users all over the world.

## Features

- Supports using the `input` element as a base with `type="text"` (don't worry, we add the `inputmode` automatically for accessability and mobile keyboards).
- Labeling, descriptions, error message displays are automatically linked to input and label elements with `aria-*` attributes.
- Formatting and parsing numbers with the `Intl.NumberFormat` API depending on the site locale or the user's preferred language.
- Support for multiple numeral systems (Latin, Arabic, and Chinese).
- Support for `Intl.NumberFormat` units and currencies.
- Support for the [Spinbutton ARIA pattern](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/spinbutton/) for increment/decrement buttons.
- Support for `min`, `max` and `step` attributes.
- Validation support with native HTML constraint validation or [Standard Schema](https://github.com/standard-schema/standard-schema) validation.
- Rejects non-numerical input characters and any incoming key presses that would make the number invalid.
- Support for `v-model` binding.
- Supported Keyboard features:

| Key                                            | Description                                                          |
| ---------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| <Kbd code="ArrowUp" label="Arrow Up" />        | increment the value by the step amount.                              |
| <Kbd code="ArrowDown" label="Arrow Down"/>     | decrement the value by the step amount.                              |
| <Kbd code="PageUp" label="Page Up" />          | increment the value by larger multiple of the step amount.           |
| <Kbd code="PageDown" label="Page Down" />      | decrement the value by larger multiple of the step amount.           |
| <Kbd code="Home" />                            | set the value to the min value if provided, otherwise has no effect. |
| <Kbd code="End" />                             | set the value to the max value if provided, otherwise has no effect. |
| <MouseWheel class="size-6" direction="up" />   | increment the value by the step amount.                              |
| <MouseWheel class="size-6" direction="down" /> | decrement the value by the step amount.                              |

## Anatomy

<AnatomyCanvas>
  <AnatomyNumberField />
</AnatomyCanvas>

## Building a Number Field Component

You can start by importing the `useNumberField` composable and using it in your number field component.

The `useNumberField` composable returns binding objects for the elements shown in the [anatomy](#anatomy), you will use `v-bind` to bind them to the corresponding DOM elements.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';

const count = ref(5);
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField label="Count" v-model="count" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

Notice that we imported the `NumberFieldProps` in the previous example. This is recommended to use as your component prop types. Not only you get type safety for your component out of it but also it handles the reactivity aspects of the props so you don't have to. You are free to extend it with your own props or omit the ones you don't need.

## Validation

### HTML Constraints

You can use the following native HTML validation properties to validate the number field:

| Name       | Type      | Description                             |
| ---------- | --------- | --------------------------------------- |
| `max`      | `number`  | The maximum value for the number field. |
| `min`      | `number`  | The minimum value for the number field. |
| `required` | `boolean` | Whether the number field is required.   |
| `step`     | `number`  | The step amount for the number field.   |

<Aside>
  Note that `min`, `max` and `step` attributes accept a number or a string, the
  string however must be parseable as a number. Formwerk takes care of typing
  strings safely and parsing them so you don't have to bind the values as
  numbers.
</Aside>

Here is an example of how to use the `max` and `min` properties to limit the number field value between 0 and 100.

Assuming you have a `NumberField` component like the one shown above, you can use it like this:

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';

const value = ref(26);
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField
    v-model="value"
    label="Amount"
    max="50"
    min="0"
    step="2"
    required
  />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Standard Schema

`useNumberField` also supports [Standard Schema](https://github.com/standard-schema/standard-schema) validation through the `schema` prop.

<Aside>

Depending on the schema validation provider you are using, the API might slightly differ. Check the supported validation providers for more information. In this example we are using the `zod` schema validation provider.

</Aside>

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';

const schema = z
  .number('Required')
  .min(1, 'Must be greater than 0')
  .max(14, 'Must be less than 14');
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField label="Number" :schema="schema" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Mixed Validation

While it is unlikely that you need both HTML constraints and Standard Schemas to validate a number field, Formwerk supports mixed validation, which means you can use both HTML constraints and Standard Schemas to validate the field and define step amount and min/max values and they work seamlessly together.

Note that HTML constraints are validated first, so any errors from the HTML constraints will be displayed first. Then once all HTML constraints are satisfied, the Standard Schema is validated.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(z.number().min(1).max(10));
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField label="Number" :schema="schema" max="50" min="0" step="2" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## Usage

### Disabled

Use disabled to mark fields as non-interactive, disabled fields are not validated and are not submitted.

If you need to prevent the user from interacting with the field while still allowing it to submit, consider using `readonly` instead.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField label="Disabled" disabled />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Readonly

Readonly fields are validated and submitted, but they do not accept user input. The field is still focusable and the value is copyable. For more info, check the [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/readonly).

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField label="Readonly" value="47" readonly />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Formatting and Units

You can use the `formatOptions` prop to format the number field value. It accepts all [options](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/NumberFormat/NumberFormat#options) that are supported by the `Intl.NumberFormat` API.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';

const value = ref(1000);
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField
    label="Amount"
    v-model="value"
    step="100"
    :formatOptions="{ style: 'currency', currency: 'USD' }"
  />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### i18n

Aside from [formatting](#formatting-and-units) you can also use any numeral system supported by the `Intl.NumberFormat` API. Like Arabic, and Chinese.

The number field also accepts a `locale` prop to change the locale of the number field. Usually you should not want to pass it manually but for demonstration purposes it is shown below.

Actually, here are 3 fields each with a different numeral system bound to the same value, and you get the parsed value with either of them.

<MdxRepl client:load preview-size="lg">

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';

const value = ref(10);
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField label="Latin" v-model="value" />
  <NumberField label="Arabic" v-model="value" locale="ar-EG" />
  <NumberField label="Chinese" v-model="value" locale="zh-cn-u-nu-hanidec" />

  value is: {{ value }}
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### RTL

The number field doesn't really need much for RTL support, however the `dir` prop can be used to set the direction of the field for convenience.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!NumberField.vue">
  <NumberFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import NumberField from './NumberField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <NumberField label="Amount" value="10" dir="rtl" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

<Aside>

There is a lot more to directionality and localization, for more info check out the [i18n guide](/guides/extras/i18n).

</Aside>

## API

### Props

These are the properties that can be passed to the `useNumberField` composable.

| Name                    | Type                        | Description                                 |
| ----------------------- | --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| `label`                 | `string`                    | The label for the number field.             |
| `locale`                | `string?`                   | The locale to use for formatting.           |
| `modelValue`            | `number?`                   | The v-model value for the number field.     |
| `description`           | `string?`                   | Description text for the number field.      |
| `incrementLabel`        | `string?`                   | Label for the increment button.             |
| `decrementLabel`        | `string?`                   | Label for the decrement button.             |
| `name`                  | `string?`                   | The name attribute for the input element.   |
| `value`                 | `Numberish?`                | The initial value of the number field.      |
| `min`                   | `Numberish?`                | The minimum allowed value.                  |
| `max`                   | `Numberish?`                | The maximum allowed value.                  |
| `step`                  | `Numberish?`                | The step value for increments/decrements.   |
| `placeholder`           | `string?`                   | Placeholder text for the input.             |
| `required`              | `boolean?`                  | Whether the field is required.              |
| `readonly`              | `boolean?`                  | Whether the field is read-only.             |
| `disabled`              | `boolean?`                  | Whether the field is disabled.              |
| `formatOptions`         | `Intl.NumberFormatOptions?` | Options for number formatting.              |
| `schema`                | `StandardSchema`            | Schema for validation.                      |
| `disableWheel`          | `boolean?`                  | Whether to disable the wheel event handler. |
| `disableHtmlValidation` | `boolean?`                  | Whether to disable HTML5 validation.        |

<Aside>
  Most of the props above can be passed as `Ref<T>` or `() => T` and the reactivity will be handled for you.
</Aside>

### Returns

These are the properties in the object returned by the `useNumberField` composable.

| Name                   | Type                               | Description                                                         |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `decrement`            | `() => void`                       | Decreases the number value by the step amount.                      |
| `decrementButtonProps` | Complex Binding                    | The decrement button element's props.                               |
| `descriptionProps`     | `AriaDescriptionProps`             | The description element's props.                                    |
| `displayError`         | `() => string \| undefined`        | A getter to display the error message if touched.                   |
| `errorMessage`         | `string \| undefined`              | The validation message.                                             |
| `errorMessageProps`    | `AriaErrorMessageProps`            | The error message element props.                                    |
| `errors`               | `string[]`                         | The field's error messages.                                         |
| `fieldValue`           | `number \| undefined`              | The current value of the field.                                     |
| `increment`            | `() => void`                       | Increases the number value by the step amount.                      |
| `incrementButtonProps` | Complex Binding                    | The increment button element's props.                               |
| `inputProps`           | Complex Binding                    | The base element props.                                             |
| `isDirty`              | `boolean`                          | Whether the field value has changed.                                |
| `isTouched`            | `boolean`                          | Whether the field is touched.                                       |
| `isValid`              | `boolean`                          | Whether the field has error messages.                               |
| `labelProps`           | `AriaLabelProps`                   | The label element props.                                            |
| `setErrors`            | `(msg: Arrayable<string>) => void` | Sets the error messages for the field and sets the `isValid` state. |
| `setTouched`           | `(touched: boolean) => void`       | Sets the `isTouched` state.                                         |
| `setValue`             | `(value: number) => void`          | Sets the field's current value.                                     |
