src/content/docs/guides/fields/sliders.mdx, before:

---
title: Sliders
description: Learn how to build accessible slider Vue components with Formwerk.
sidebar:
  order: 6
---

import { Aside } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import AnatomySlider from '@components/AnatomySlider.vue';
import AnatomyCanvas from '@components/AnatomyCanvas.vue';
import MdxRepl from '@components/MdxRepl.vue';
import Kbd from '@components/KeyboardKey.vue';

import SliderThumb from './_partials/_sliderThumb.mdx';
import Slider from './_partials/_slider.mdx';
import SliderMultiple from './_partials/_sliderMultiple.mdx';

> A slider is an input where the user selects a value from within a given range. Sliders typically have a slider thumb that can be moved along a bar, rail, or track to change the value of the slider.

## Features

- Labeling, descriptions, error message displays are automatically linked to input and label elements with `aria-*` attributes.
- `v-model` support for binding the value of the slider and the individual thumbs.
- Multi-thumb support with auto value clamping.
- Support for `min`, `max` and `step` attributes.
- Support for both horizontal and vertical orientations.
- Support for both LTR and RTL directions.
- Interactive behaviors:
  - Clicking the track element sets the value of the slider or the nearest suitable thumb to the clicked position.
  - Dragging the thumb element changes the value of the slider.
- Supported keyboard interactions:

| Key                                       | Description                                                                                |
| ----------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| <Kbd code="ArrowRight" label="Right" />   | Increments the slider value of the currently focused thumb. In RTL, it decrements instead. |
| <Kbd code="ArrowLeft" label="Left" />     | Decrements the slider value of the currently focused thumb. In RTL, it increments instead. |
| <Kbd code="ArrowUp" label="Up" />         | Increments the slider value of the currently focused thumb.                                |
| <Kbd code="ArrowDown" label="Down" />     | Decrements the slider value of the currently focused thumb.                                |
| <Kbd code="Home" label="Home" />          | Sets the slider value of the currently focused thumb to the minimum possible value.        |
| <Kbd code="End" label="End" />            | Sets the slider value of the currently focused thumb to the maximum possible value.        |
| <Kbd code="PageUp" label="Page Up" />     | Increments the slider value of the currently focused thumb by a large step.                |
| <Kbd code="PageDown" label="Page Down" /> | Decrements the slider value of the currently focused thumb by a large step.                |

## Anatomy

<AnatomyCanvas>
  <AnatomySlider />
</AnatomyCanvas>

## Building a thumb component

Every slider needs at least one thumb to represent the current value of the slider. This means the slider in Formwerk is a compound component similar to Radio buttons.

First, let's build a thumb component that will be used in the slider later, we will keep styling to a minimum by using a simple circle SVG.

You will be using the `useSliderThumb` composable to build the thumb component.

<SliderThumb />

There is nothing to show yet, because we need to build the slider component.

## Building a slider component

You will be using the `useSlider` composable to build the slider component.

The `useSlider` composable returns binding objects for the elements shown in the [anatomy](#anatomy), you will use `v-bind` to bind them to the corresponding DOM elements.

The Slider is what we consider a fully custom component, meaning it doesn't have an underlying `input` base element that you can use. While The `input[type="range"]` may be a suitable candidate, it doesn't scale to support the wide range (pun intended) of use-cases that developers expect of slider inputs today.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Thumb.vue">
  <SliderThumb />
</div>

<div slot="Slider.vue">
  <Slider />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import Slider from './Slider.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <Slider label="Volume" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

Notice that in order to model the slider progress visually we used the utility composable `useThumbMetadata` to calculate the percentage of the thumb position.

## Validation

Because sliders in Formwerk are a fully custom component, it doesn't support any HTML validation attributes. You can however, use Typed Schemas to validate the value of the slider.

### Typed Schema

The `useSlider` composable accepts a `schema` prop that has a typed schema value.

<Aside>

Depending on the schema validation provider you are using, the API might slightly differ. Check the supported validation providers for more information. In this example we are using the `zod` schema validation provider.

</Aside>

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Thumb.vue">
  <SliderThumb />
</div>

<div slot="!Slider.vue">
  <Slider />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import Slider from './Slider.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(z.number('Required').min(30).max(80));
</script>

<template>
  <Slider label="Volume" :schema="schema" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## Usage

### Multiple Thumbs

You can have as many thumbs as you want inside a slider, just add another `<Thumb />` component and this will be automatically handled for you:

- Min/Max clamping for each thumb.
- Value conversion to an array instead of a single number.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Thumb.vue">
  <SliderThumb />
</div>

<div slot="MultipleSlider.vue">
  <SliderMultiple />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import MultipleSlider from './MultipleSlider.vue';

const value = ref([10, 30]);
</script>

<template>
  <MultipleSlider label="Multiple Slider" v-model="value" />

  MultipleSlider value is: {{ value }}
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

Note that we did change some CSS from the previous examples in order to color the track properly, but it is up to you how you want to do that in anyway you want.

### Disabled

Use disabled to mark sliders as non-interactive, disabled sliders are not validated and are not submitted.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Thumb.vue">
  <SliderThumb />
</div>

<div slot="!Slider.vue">
  <Slider />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Slider from './Slider.vue';

const value = ref(50);
</script>

<template>
  <Slider label="Disabled Slider" v-model="value" disabled />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

You can also disable any individual `Thumb` by passing `disabled` to it as well. But it won't prevent validation/submission of the slider.

### Readonly

Readonly sliders are validated and submitted, but they do not accept user input. The slider thumbs would still be focusable. For more info, check the [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/readonly).

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Thumb.vue">
  <SliderThumb />
</div>

<div slot="!Slider.vue">
  <Slider />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Slider from './Slider.vue';

const value = ref(50);
</script>

<template>
  <Slider label="Readonly Slider" v-model="value" readonly />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### RTL

The `useSlider` composable accepts a `dir` property, you can set it to `RTL` and it will handle thumb positioning automatically along with inverting the horizontal arrow keys (left/right arrows).

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Thumb.vue">
  <SliderThumb />
</div>

<div slot="!Slider.vue">
  <Slider />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Slider from './Slider.vue';

const value = ref(50);
</script>

<template>
  <Slider label="Vertical Slider" v-model="value" dir="rtl" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

<Aside>

There is a lot more to directionality and localization, for more info check out the [i18n guide](/guides/extras/i18n).

</Aside>

### Orientation

`useSlider` also accepts an `orientation` prop, you can set to either `horizontal` (default) or `vertical`.

Formwerk will handle most things in either orientation in terms of interaction and thumb positioning. But slider layout is left to you to do.

Here is an example that uses the `[aria-orientation]` attribute that is applied automatically. We will use it to flip the slider we initially created with some custom styles.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Thumb.vue">
  <SliderThumb />
</div>

<div slot="Slider.vue">
  <Slider />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Slider from './Slider.vue';

const value = ref(0);
</script>

<template>
  <Slider label="Vertical Slider" v-model="value" orientation="vertical" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## Styling

You probably have noticed that the `trackProps` and `thumbProps` contain some minor styling properties, those are the bare minimum to get the slider working and they are automatically added for you.

If you are interested in knowing what properties are added, here is a list:

- `trackProps` style properties:
  - `container-type`: is set to `size` or `inline-size` depending on the orientation. You should NOT override this property.
  - `position`: is set to `relative`, you can override this to anything but `static`.
- `thumbProps` style properties:
  - `position`: is set to `absolute`, you should NOT override this property.
  - `translate`: used to position the thumb, you should NOT override this property.
  - `will-change`: is set to `translate`, you should NOT override this property.
  - any inset position properties like `top`, `left`, `right`, `bottom` are set to `0`, you should NOT override these properties.

We were very careful to not add any easily overridden properties to the `trackProps` and `thumbProps` to avoid any conflicts with your custom styles.

Other than all of that you can use any styling solution you want, whether it's [TailwindCSS](https://tailwindcss.com/), or plain CSS.

#### Thumb attributes

The thumb element will receive the `aria-orientation` attribute which is the same as the slider's orientation so you can style tooltips or other UI elements according to the slider's orientation.

#### Slider attributes

The slider element will receive the `aria-orientation` attribute which is the prop you pass to the slider.

## API

### Thumb

#### Props

These are the properties that can be passed to the `useSliderThumb` composable.

| Name       | Type      | Description                                                                                  |
| ---------- | --------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| label      | `string`  | Optional label for the thumb, falls back to the slider's label.                              |
| modelValue | `number`  | The current value of the thumb.                                                              |
| disabled   | `boolean` | Whether the thumb is disabled or not. Doesn't affect validation or submission of the slider. |

#### Returns

These are the properties in the object returned by the `useSliderThumb` composable.

| Name         | Type            | Description                                |
| ------------ | --------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| thumbProps   | Complex Binding | Properties for the thumb element.          |
| currentValue | `number`        | Current value of the thumb.                |
| isDragging   | `boolean`       | Whether the thumb is being dragged or not. |

### Slider

#### Props

These are the properties that can be passed to the `useSlider` composable.

| Name        | Type                  | Description                    |
| ----------- | --------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| label       | `string`              | Label for the slider           |
| name        | `string`              | Optional name for the slider   |
| orientation | `Orientation`         | Orientation of the slider      |
| dir         | `Direction`           | Direction of the slider        |
| modelValue  | `number \| number[]`  | Current value of the slider    |
| min         | `number`              | Minimum value of the slider    |
| max         | `number`              | Maximum value of the slider    |
| step        | `number`              | Step value for the slider      |
| disabled    | `boolean`             | Whether the slider is disabled |
| readonly    | `boolean`             | Whether the slider is readonly |
| schema      | `TypedSchema<number>` | Schema for the slider value    |

#### Returns

These are the properties in the object returned by the `useSlider` composable.

| Name              | Type                                    | Description                                                          |
| ----------------- | --------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| displayError      | `() => string \| undefined`             | A getter to display the error message if touched.                    |
| errorMessage      | `string \| undefined`                   | The validation message.                                              |
| errorMessageProps | `AriaErrorMessageProps`                 | The error message element props.                                     |
| errors            | `string[]`                              | The slider's error messages.                                         |
| fieldValue        | `number \| undefined`                   | The current value of the slider.                                     |
| groupProps        | Complex Binding                         | The slider group container.                                          |
| trackProps        | Complex Binding                         | The slider's track props.                                            |
| isDirty           | `boolean`                               | Whether the slider value has changed.                                |
| isTouched         | `boolean`                               | Whether the slider is touched.                                       |
| isValid           | `boolean`                               | Whether the slider has error messages.                               |
| labelProps        | `AriaLabelProps`                        | The label element props.                                             |
| setErrors         | `(msg: Arrayable<string>) => void`      | Sets the error messages for the slider and sets the `isValid` state. |
| setTouched        | `(touched: boolean) => void`            | Sets the `isTouched` state.                                          |
| setValue          | `(value: number) => void`               | Sets the slider's current value.                                     |
| useThumbMetadata  | `(thumbIndex: number) => ThumbMetadata` | Returns metadata for a slider thumb at the given index.              |

#### `useThumbMetadata` returns

Additionally, `useThumbMetadata` returns an object with the following properties:

| Name          | Type     | Description                                            |
| ------------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| value         | `number` | Current value of the specified thumb.                  |
| percent       | `number` | Current value percentage compared to the thumb's max.  |
| min           | `number` | The minimum possible value of the thumb.               |
| max           | `number` | The Maximum possible value of the thumb.               |
| sliderPercent | `number` | Current value percentage compared to the slider's max. |
| sliderMin     | `number` | The minimum value of the slider.                       |
| sliderMax     | `number` | The maximum value of the slider.                       |

Commit message:

feat: kill typed schema guides

src/content/docs/guides/fields/sliders.mdx, after:

---
title: Sliders
description: Learn how to build accessible slider Vue components with Formwerk.
sidebar:
  order: 6
---

import { Aside } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import AnatomySlider from '@components/AnatomySlider.vue';
import AnatomyCanvas from '@components/AnatomyCanvas.vue';
import MdxRepl from '@components/MdxRepl.vue';
import Kbd from '@components/KeyboardKey.vue';

import SliderThumb from './_partials/_sliderThumb.mdx';
import Slider from './_partials/_slider.mdx';
import SliderMultiple from './_partials/_sliderMultiple.mdx';

> A slider is an input where the user selects a value from within a given range. Sliders typically have a slider thumb that can be moved along a bar, rail, or track to change the value of the slider.

## Features

- Labeling, descriptions, error message displays are automatically linked to input and label elements with `aria-*` attributes.
- `v-model` support for binding the value of the slider and the individual thumbs.
- Multi-thumb support with auto value clamping.
- Support for `min`, `max` and `step` attributes.
- Support for both horizontal and vertical orientations.
- Support for both LTR and RTL directions.
- Validation with [Standard Schema](https://github.com/standard-schema/standard-schema).
- Interactive behaviors:
  - Clicking the track element sets the value of the slider or the nearest suitable thumb to the clicked position.
  - Dragging the thumb element changes the value of the slider.
- Supported keyboard interactions:

| Key                                       | Description                                                                                |
| ----------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| <Kbd code="ArrowRight" label="Right" />   | Increments the slider value of the currently focused thumb. In RTL, it decrements instead. |
| <Kbd code="ArrowLeft" label="Left" />     | Decrements the slider value of the currently focused thumb. In RTL, it increments instead. |
| <Kbd code="ArrowUp" label="Up" />         | Increments the slider value of the currently focused thumb.                                |
| <Kbd code="ArrowDown" label="Down" />     | Decrements the slider value of the currently focused thumb.                                |
| <Kbd code="Home" label="Home" />          | Sets the slider value of the currently focused thumb to the minimum possible value.        |
| <Kbd code="End" label="End" />            | Sets the slider value of the currently focused thumb to the maximum possible value.        |
| <Kbd code="PageUp" label="Page Up" />     | Increments the slider value of the currently focused thumb by a large step.                |
| <Kbd code="PageDown" label="Page Down" /> | Decrements the slider value of the currently focused thumb by a large step.                |

## Anatomy

<AnatomyCanvas>
  <AnatomySlider />
</AnatomyCanvas>

## Building a thumb component

Every slider needs at least one thumb to represent the current value of the slider. This means the slider in Formwerk is a compound component similar to Radio buttons.

First, let's build a thumb component that will be used in the slider later, we will keep styling to a minimum by using a simple circle SVG.

You will be using the `useSliderThumb` composable to build the thumb component.

<SliderThumb />

There is nothing to show yet, because we need to build the slider component.

## Building a slider component

You will be using the `useSlider` composable to build the slider component.

The `useSlider` composable returns binding objects for the elements shown in the [anatomy](#anatomy), you will use `v-bind` to bind them to the corresponding DOM elements.

The Slider is what we consider a fully custom component, meaning it doesn't have an underlying `input` base element that you can use. While The `input[type="range"]` may be a suitable candidate, it doesn't scale to support the wide range (pun intended) of use-cases that developers expect of slider inputs today.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Thumb.vue">
  <SliderThumb />
</div>

<div slot="Slider.vue">
  <Slider />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import Slider from './Slider.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <Slider label="Volume" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

Notice that in order to model the slider progress visually we used the utility composable `useThumbMetadata` to calculate the percentage of the thumb position.

## Validation

Because sliders in Formwerk are a fully custom component, it doesn't support any HTML validation attributes. You can however, use [Standard Schema](https://github.com/standard-schema/standard-schema) to validate the value of the slider.

### Standard Schema

The `useSlider` composable accepts a `schema` prop that is an instance of a Standard Schema.

<Aside>

Depending on the schema validation provider you are using, the API might slightly differ. Check the supported validation providers for more information. In this example we are using the `zod` schema validation provider.

</Aside>

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Thumb.vue">
  <SliderThumb />
</div>

<div slot="!Slider.vue">
  <Slider />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import Slider from './Slider.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(z.number('Required').min(30).max(80));
</script>

<template>
  <Slider label="Volume" :schema="schema" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## Usage

### Multiple Thumbs

You can have as many thumbs as you want inside a slider, just add another `<Thumb />` component and this will be automatically handled for you:

- Min/Max clamping for each thumb.
- Value conversion to an array instead of a single number.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Thumb.vue">
  <SliderThumb />
</div>

<div slot="MultipleSlider.vue">
  <SliderMultiple />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import MultipleSlider from './MultipleSlider.vue';

const value = ref([10, 30]);
</script>

<template>
  <MultipleSlider label="Multiple Slider" v-model="value" />

  MultipleSlider value is: {{ value }}
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

Note that we did change some CSS from the previous examples in order to color the track properly, but it is up to you how you want to do that in anyway you want.

### Disabled

Use disabled to mark sliders as non-interactive, disabled sliders are not validated and are not submitted.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Thumb.vue">
  <SliderThumb />
</div>

<div slot="!Slider.vue">
  <Slider />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Slider from './Slider.vue';

const value = ref(50);
</script>

<template>
  <Slider label="Disabled Slider" v-model="value" disabled />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

You can also disable any individual `Thumb` by passing `disabled` to it as well. But it won't prevent validation/submission of the slider.

### Readonly

Readonly sliders are validated and submitted, but they do not accept user input. The slider thumbs would still be focusable. For more info, check the [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/readonly).

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Thumb.vue">
  <SliderThumb />
</div>

<div slot="!Slider.vue">
  <Slider />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Slider from './Slider.vue';

const value = ref(50);
</script>

<template>
  <Slider label="Readonly Slider" v-model="value" readonly />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### RTL

The `useSlider` composable accepts a `dir` property, you can set it to `RTL` and it will handle thumb positioning automatically along with inverting the horizontal arrow keys (left/right arrows).

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Thumb.vue">
  <SliderThumb />
</div>

<div slot="!Slider.vue">
  <Slider />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Slider from './Slider.vue';

const value = ref(50);
</script>

<template>
  <Slider label="Vertical Slider" v-model="value" dir="rtl" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

<Aside>

There is a lot more to directionality and localization, for more info check out the [i18n guide](/guides/extras/i18n).

</Aside>

### Orientation

`useSlider` also accepts an `orientation` prop, you can set to either `horizontal` (default) or `vertical`.

Formwerk will handle most things in either orientation in terms of interaction and thumb positioning. But slider layout is left to you to do.

Here is an example that uses the `[aria-orientation]` attribute that is applied automatically. We will use it to flip the slider we initially created with some custom styles.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Thumb.vue">
  <SliderThumb />
</div>

<div slot="Slider.vue">
  <Slider />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Slider from './Slider.vue';

const value = ref(0);
</script>

<template>
  <Slider label="Vertical Slider" v-model="value" orientation="vertical" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## Styling

You probably have noticed that the `trackProps` and `thumbProps` contain some minor styling properties, those are the bare minimum to get the slider working and they are automatically added for you.

If you are interested in knowing what properties are added, here is a list:

- `trackProps` style properties:
  - `container-type`: is set to `size` or `inline-size` depending on the orientation. You should NOT override this property.
  - `position`: is set to `relative`, you can override this to anything but `static`.
- `thumbProps` style properties:
  - `position`: is set to `absolute`, you should NOT override this property.
  - `translate`: used to position the thumb, you should NOT override this property.
  - `will-change`: is set to `translate`, you should NOT override this property.
  - any inset position properties like `top`, `left`, `right`, `bottom` are set to `0`, you should NOT override these properties.

We were very careful to not add any easily overridden properties to the `trackProps` and `thumbProps` to avoid any conflicts with your custom styles.

Other than all of that you can use any styling solution you want, whether it's [TailwindCSS](https://tailwindcss.com/), or plain CSS.

#### Thumb attributes

The thumb element will receive the `aria-orientation` attribute which is the same as the slider's orientation so you can style tooltips or other UI elements according to the slider's orientation.

#### Slider attributes

The slider element will receive the `aria-orientation` attribute which is the prop you pass to the slider.

## API

### Thumb

#### Props

These are the properties that can be passed to the `useSliderThumb` composable.

| Name       | Type      | Description                                                                                  |
| ---------- | --------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| label      | `string`  | Optional label for the thumb, falls back to the slider's label.                              |
| modelValue | `number`  | The current value of the thumb.                                                              |
| disabled   | `boolean` | Whether the thumb is disabled or not. Doesn't affect validation or submission of the slider. |

#### Returns

These are the properties in the object returned by the `useSliderThumb` composable.

| Name         | Type            | Description                                |
| ------------ | --------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| thumbProps   | Complex Binding | Properties for the thumb element.          |
| currentValue | `number`        | Current value of the thumb.                |
| isDragging   | `boolean`       | Whether the thumb is being dragged or not. |

### Slider

#### Props

These are the properties that can be passed to the `useSlider` composable.

| Name        | Type                     | Description                     |
| ----------- | ------------------------ | ------------------------------- |
| label       | `string`                 | Label for the slider.           |
| name        | `string`                 | Optional name for the slider.   |
| orientation | `Orientation`            | Orientation of the slider.      |
| dir         | `Direction`              | Direction of the slider.        |
| modelValue  | `number \| number[]`     | Current value of the slider.    |
| min         | `number`                 | Minimum value of the slider.    |
| max         | `number`                 | Maximum value of the slider.    |
| step        | `number`                 | Step value for the slider.      |
| disabled    | `boolean`                | Whether the slider is disabled. |
| readonly    | `boolean`                | Whether the slider is readonly. |
| schema      | `StandardSchema<number>` | Schema for the slider value.    |

#### Returns

These are the properties in the object returned by the `useSlider` composable.

| Name              | Type                                    | Description                                                          |
| ----------------- | --------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| displayError      | `() => string \| undefined`             | A getter to display the error message if touched.                    |
| errorMessage      | `string \| undefined`                   | The validation message.                                              |
| errorMessageProps | `AriaErrorMessageProps`                 | The error message element props.                                     |
| errors            | `string[]`                              | The slider's error messages.                                         |
| fieldValue        | `number \| undefined`                   | The current value of the slider.                                     |
| groupProps        | Complex Binding                         | The slider group container.                                          |
| trackProps        | Complex Binding                         | The slider's track props.                                            |
| isDirty           | `boolean`                               | Whether the slider value has changed.                                |
| isTouched         | `boolean`                               | Whether the slider is touched.                                       |
| isValid           | `boolean`                               | Whether the slider has error messages.                               |
| labelProps        | `AriaLabelProps`                        | The label element props.                                             |
| setErrors         | `(msg: Arrayable<string>) => void`      | Sets the error messages for the slider and sets the `isValid` state. |
| setTouched        | `(touched: boolean) => void`            | Sets the `isTouched` state.                                          |
| setValue          | `(value: number) => void`               | Sets the slider's current value.                                     |
| useThumbMetadata  | `(thumbIndex: number) => ThumbMetadata` | Returns metadata for a slider thumb at the given index.              |

#### `useThumbMetadata` returns

Additionally, `useThumbMetadata` returns an object with the following properties:

| Name          | Type     | Description                                            |
| ------------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| value         | `number` | Current value of the specified thumb.                  |
| percent       | `number` | Current value percentage compared to the thumb's max.  |
| min           | `number` | The minimum possible value of the thumb.               |
| max           | `number` | The Maximum possible value of the thumb.               |
| sliderPercent | `number` | Current value percentage compared to the slider's max. |
| sliderMin     | `number` | The minimum value of the slider.                       |
| sliderMax     | `number` | The maximum value of the slider.                       |
