src/content/docs/guides/fields/switches.mdx, before:

---
title: Switches
description: Learn how to build accessible switch Vue components with Formwerk.
sidebar:
  order: 7
---

import { Aside } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

import AnatomyCanvas from '@components/AnatomyCanvas.vue';
import AnatomySwitch from '@components/AnatomySwitch.vue';
import MdxRepl from '@components/MdxRepl.vue';
import Kbd from '@components/KeyboardKey.vue';

import SwitchPartial from './_partials/_switch.mdx';
import SwitchCustomPartial from './_partials/_switchCustom.mdx';

> A switch is an input widget that allows users to choose one of two values: on or off. Switches are similar to checkboxes and toggle buttons, which can also serve as binary inputs. One difference, however, is that switches can only be used for binary input.

The switch field has enough unique behaviors and use-cases that justifies it having its own composable. The binary state of a switch means it shouldn't be used to represent "required" inputs where the switch needs to be "on". It is a user preference that can be turned off.

## Features

- You can use `input[type="checkbox"]` element as a base or any custom element.
- Labeling, descriptions, error message displays are automatically linked to input and label elements with `aria-*` attributes.
- Support for custom `on` and `off` values.
- Validation support with Typed Schemas.
- Support for `v-model` binding.
- Supported keyboard features:

| Key                                | Description                |
| ---------------------------------- | -------------------------- |
| <Kbd code="Space" label="Space" /> | Toggles the switch on/off. |
| <Kbd code="Enter" label="Enter" /> | Toggles the switch on/off. |

## Anatomy

<AnatomyCanvas>
  <AnatomySwitch />
</AnatomyCanvas>

## Building a Switch component

The `useSwitch` composable provides the necessary props and methods to build a switch component. It returns binding objects for the elements shown in the [anatomy](#anatomy), you will use `v-bind` to bind them to the corresponding DOM elements.

There is two ways to build a switch component:

- With an `input[type="checkbox"]` as a base element.
- Without an `input` element, like a `div` or a `button`.

We will review the two ways to build a switch component in the following examples.

### With `input[type="checkbox"]` base element

We will add some styling to the next example because switches don't look like one unless we style it. Also it would just look like a checkbox.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="Switch.vue">
  <SwitchPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Switch from './Switch.vue';

const isOn = ref(false);
</script>

<template>
  <Switch label="Theme" v-model="isOn" />

  <div>Switch is: {{ isOn }}</div>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Without input elements

Similar to the previous example, we can get the exact same look and behavior with a `div` element or a `button` element.

In this example will actually use `svg` element to closely resemble a switch, we will borrow those SVG paths from [Phosphor Icons](https://phosphoricons.com/).

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="Switch.vue">
  <SwitchCustomPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Switch from './Switch.vue';

const isOn = ref(false);
</script>

<template>
  <Switch label="Theme" v-model="isOn" />
  <div>Switch is: {{ isOn }}</div>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## Validation

### HTML Constraints

While ideally the switch field should not be validatable, you can still use the `required` attribute if you chose to use an `input[type="checkbox"]` as a base element. We make no assumption about how you want to use the switch field.

| Name       | Type      | Description                           |
| ---------- | --------- | ------------------------------------- |
| `required` | `boolean` | Whether the number field is required. |

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Switch.vue">
  <SwitchPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import Switch from './Switch.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <Switch label="HTML Validation" required />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Typed Schemas

You can also pass a `schema` prop to the switch component to validate the value.

<Aside>

Depending on the schema validation provider you are using, the API might slightly differ. Check the supported validation providers for more information. In this example we are using the `zod` schema validation provider.

</Aside>

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Switch.vue">
  <SwitchCustomPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import Switch from './Switch.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(z.literal(true));
</script>

<template>
  <Switch label="Typed Schema" :schema="schema" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Mixed Validation

While it is unlikely that you need both HTML constraints and Typed schemas to validate a number field, Formwerk supports mixed validation, which means you can use both HTML constraints and Typed schemas to validate the switch and they will work together.

Note that HTML constraints are validated first, so any errors from the HTML constraints will be displayed first. Then once all HTML constraints are satisfied, the typed schema is validated.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Switch.vue">
  <SwitchPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import Switch from './Switch.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(
  z.custom((val) => {
    return val !== true;
  }, 'I am a paradox'),
);
</script>

<template>
  <Switch label="Mixed Validation" required :schema="schema" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

If you need to disable the native validation, you can do so by setting the `disableHtmlValidation` prop to `true`. You can also disable it globally for all fields, for more information check out the [Validation](/guides/forms/validation) guide.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Switch.vue">
  <SwitchPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import Switch from './Switch.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(
  z.custom((val) => {
    return val !== true;
  }, 'I am a paradox'),
);
</script>

<template>
  <Switch
    label="Mixed Validation"
    required
    :schema="schema"
    disable-html-validation
  />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## Usage

### Disabled

Use disabled to mark the switch as non-interactive. Disabled switches are not validated and will not be submitted.

If you need to prevent the user from interacting with the field while still allowing it to submit, consider using `readonly` instead.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Switch.vue">
  <SwitchPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import Switch from './Switch.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <Switch label="Disabled switch" disabled />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Readonly

Readonly switches are validated and submitted, but they do not accept user input. The switch is still focusable and the value is copyable. For more info, check the [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/readonly).

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Switch.vue">
  <SwitchPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Switch from './Switch.vue';

const value = ref(true);
</script>

<template>
  <Switch label="Readonly switch" v-model="value" readonly />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Custom On/Off values

You can customize the `on` and `off` values of the switch component by passing the `trueValue` and `falseValue` props. They can be anything you want.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Switch.vue">
  <SwitchPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Switch from './Switch.vue';

const value = ref('off');
</script>

<template>
  <Switch
    label="Custom values"
    v-model="value"
    :trueValue="'on'"
    :falseValue="'off'"
  />

  <div>Value is: {{ value }}</div>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## API

## Props

These are the properties that can be passed to the `useSwitch` composable.

| Name                  | Type                   | Description                                                  |
| --------------------- | ---------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| label                 | `string`               | The label for the switch component.                          |
| name                  | `string`               | The name attribute for the switch component.                 |
| modelValue            | `boolean`              | The value of the switch component.                           |
| required              | `boolean`              | Whether the switch component is required.                    |
| readonly              | `boolean`              | Whether the switch component is readonly.                    |
| disabled              | `boolean`              | Whether the switch component is disabled.                    |
| trueValue             | `any`                  | The value to be assigned when the switch is on.              |
| falseValue            | `any`                  | The value to be assigned when the switch is off.             |
| schema                | `TypedSchema<unknown>` | The schema to validate the switch component value.           |
| disableHtmlValidation | `boolean`              | Whether to disable HTML validation for the switch component. |

### Returns

These are the properties in the object returned by the `useSwitch` composable.

| Name                | Type                        | Description                            |
| ------------------- | --------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| `errorMessage`      | `string \| undefined`       | The validation message.                |
| `errorMessageProps` | `AriaErrorMessageProps`     | The error message element props.       |
| `inputProps`        | Complex Binding             | The base element props.                |
| `isDirty`           | `boolean`                   | Whether the switch value has changed.  |
| `isPressed`         | `boolean`                   | Whether the switch is on/off.          |
| `isTouched`         | `boolean`                   | Whether the switch is touched.         |
| `isValid`           | `boolean`                   | Whether the switch has error messages. |
| `labelProps`        | `AriaLabelProps`            | The label element props.               |
| `togglePressed`     | `(force?: boolean) => void` | Switches the field value on/off        |

Commit message:

feat: kill typed schema guides

src/content/docs/guides/fields/switches.mdx, after:

---
title: Switches
description: Learn how to build accessible switch Vue components with Formwerk.
sidebar:
  order: 7
---

import { Aside } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

import AnatomyCanvas from '@components/AnatomyCanvas.vue';
import AnatomySwitch from '@components/AnatomySwitch.vue';
import MdxRepl from '@components/MdxRepl.vue';
import Kbd from '@components/KeyboardKey.vue';

import SwitchPartial from './_partials/_switch.mdx';
import SwitchCustomPartial from './_partials/_switchCustom.mdx';

> A switch is an input widget that allows users to choose one of two values: on or off. Switches are similar to checkboxes and toggle buttons, which can also serve as binary inputs. One difference, however, is that switches can only be used for binary input.

The switch field has enough unique behaviors and use-cases that justifies it having its own composable. The binary state of a switch means it shouldn't be used to represent "required" inputs where the switch needs to be "on". It is a user preference that can be turned off.

## Features

- You can use `input[type="checkbox"]` element as a base or any custom element.
- Labeling, descriptions, error message displays are automatically linked to input and label elements with `aria-*` attributes.
- Support for custom `on` and `off` values.
- Validation support with native HTML constraint validation or [Standard Schema](https://github.com/standard-schema/standard-schema) validation.
- Support for `v-model` binding.
- Supported keyboard features:

| Key                                | Description                |
| ---------------------------------- | -------------------------- |
| <Kbd code="Space" label="Space" /> | Toggles the switch on/off. |
| <Kbd code="Enter" label="Enter" /> | Toggles the switch on/off. |

## Anatomy

<AnatomyCanvas>
  <AnatomySwitch />
</AnatomyCanvas>

## Building a Switch component

The `useSwitch` composable provides the necessary props and methods to build a switch component. It returns binding objects for the elements shown in the [anatomy](#anatomy), you will use `v-bind` to bind them to the corresponding DOM elements.

There is two ways to build a switch component:

- With an `input[type="checkbox"]` as a base element.
- Without an `input` element, like a `div` or a `button`.

We will review the two ways to build a switch component in the following examples.

### With `input[type="checkbox"]` base element

We will add some styling to the next example because switches don't look like one unless we style it. Also it would just look like a checkbox.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="Switch.vue">
  <SwitchPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Switch from './Switch.vue';

const isOn = ref(false);
</script>

<template>
  <Switch label="Theme" v-model="isOn" />

  <div>Switch is: {{ isOn }}</div>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Without input elements

Similar to the previous example, we can get the exact same look and behavior with a `div` element or a `button` element.

In this example will actually use `svg` element to closely resemble a switch, we will borrow those SVG paths from [Phosphor Icons](https://phosphoricons.com/).

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="Switch.vue">
  <SwitchCustomPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Switch from './Switch.vue';

const isOn = ref(false);
</script>

<template>
  <Switch label="Theme" v-model="isOn" />
  <div>Switch is: {{ isOn }}</div>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## Validation

### HTML Constraints

While ideally the switch field should not be validatable, you can still use the `required` attribute if you chose to use an `input[type="checkbox"]` as a base element. We make no assumption about how you want to use the switch field.

| Name       | Type      | Description                           |
| ---------- | --------- | ------------------------------------- |
| `required` | `boolean` | Whether the number field is required. |

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Switch.vue">
  <SwitchPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import Switch from './Switch.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <Switch label="HTML Validation" required />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Standard Schemas

`useSwitch` also supports [Standard Schema](https://github.com/standard-schema/standard-schema) validation through the `schema` prop.

<Aside>

Depending on the schema validation provider you are using, the API might slightly differ. Check the supported validation providers for more information. In this example we are using the `zod` schema validation provider.

</Aside>

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Switch.vue">
  <SwitchCustomPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import Switch from './Switch.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(z.literal(true));
</script>

<template>
  <Switch label="Standard Schema" :schema="schema" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Mixed Validation

While it is unlikely that you need both HTML constraints and Standard Schemas to validate a switch, Formwerk supports mixed validation, which means you can use both HTML constraints and Standard Schemas to validate the switch and they will work together.

Note that HTML constraints are validated first, so any errors from the HTML constraints will be displayed first. Then once all HTML constraints are satisfied, the Standard Schema is validated.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Switch.vue">
  <SwitchPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import Switch from './Switch.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(
  z.custom((val) => {
    return val !== true;
  }, 'I am a paradox'),
);
</script>

<template>
  <Switch label="Mixed Validation" required :schema="schema" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

If you need to disable the native validation, you can do so by setting the `disableHtmlValidation` prop to `true`. You can also disable it globally for all fields, for more information check out the [Validation](/guides/forms/validation) guide.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Switch.vue">
  <SwitchPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import Switch from './Switch.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(
  z.custom((val) => {
    return val !== true;
  }, 'I am a paradox'),
);
</script>

<template>
  <Switch
    label="Mixed Validation"
    required
    :schema="schema"
    disable-html-validation
  />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## Usage

### Disabled

Use disabled to mark the switch as non-interactive. Disabled switches are not validated and will not be submitted.

If you need to prevent the user from interacting with the field while still allowing it to submit, consider using `readonly` instead.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Switch.vue">
  <SwitchPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import Switch from './Switch.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <Switch label="Disabled switch" disabled />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Readonly

Readonly switches are validated and submitted, but they do not accept user input. The switch is still focusable and the value is copyable. For more info, check the [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/readonly).

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Switch.vue">
  <SwitchPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Switch from './Switch.vue';

const value = ref(true);
</script>

<template>
  <Switch label="Readonly switch" v-model="value" readonly />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Custom On/Off values

You can customize the `on` and `off` values of the switch component by passing the `trueValue` and `falseValue` props. They can be anything you want.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!Switch.vue">
  <SwitchPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref } from 'vue';
import Switch from './Switch.vue';

const value = ref('off');
</script>

<template>
  <Switch
    label="Custom values"
    v-model="value"
    :trueValue="'on'"
    :falseValue="'off'"
  />

  <div>Value is: {{ value }}</div>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## API

## Props

These are the properties that can be passed to the `useSwitch` composable.

| Name                  | Type                      | Description                                                  |
| --------------------- | ------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| label                 | `string`                  | The label for the switch component.                          |
| name                  | `string`                  | The name attribute for the switch component.                 |
| modelValue            | `boolean`                 | The value of the switch component.                           |
| required              | `boolean`                 | Whether the switch component is required.                    |
| readonly              | `boolean`                 | Whether the switch component is readonly.                    |
| disabled              | `boolean`                 | Whether the switch component is disabled.                    |
| trueValue             | `any`                     | The value to be assigned when the switch is on.              |
| falseValue            | `any`                     | The value to be assigned when the switch is off.             |
| schema                | `StandardSchema<unknown>` | The schema to validate the switch component value.           |
| disableHtmlValidation | `boolean`                 | Whether to disable HTML validation for the switch component. |

### Returns

These are the properties in the object returned by the `useSwitch` composable.

| Name                | Type                        | Description                            |
| ------------------- | --------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| `errorMessage`      | `string \| undefined`       | The validation message.                |
| `errorMessageProps` | `AriaErrorMessageProps`     | The error message element props.       |
| `inputProps`        | Complex Binding             | The base element props.                |
| `isDirty`           | `boolean`                   | Whether the switch value has changed.  |
| `isPressed`         | `boolean`                   | Whether the switch is on/off.          |
| `isTouched`         | `boolean`                   | Whether the switch is touched.         |
| `isValid`           | `boolean`                   | Whether the switch has error messages. |
| `labelProps`        | `AriaLabelProps`            | The label element props.               |
| `togglePressed`     | `(force?: boolean) => void` | Switches the field value on/off        |
