src/content/docs/guides/fields/text-fields.mdx, before:

---
title: Text Fields
description: A guide in my new Starlight docs site.
sidebar:
  order: 1
---

<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/@live-codes/browser-compilers@0.15.1/dist/vue-compiler-sfc/vue-compiler-sfc.js"></script>

import { Tabs, TabItem, Aside } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import AnatomyCanvas from '@components/AnatomyCanvas.vue';
import AnatomyTextField from '@components/AnatomyTextField.vue';
import MdxRepl from '@components/MdxRepl.vue';
import TextFieldPartial from './_partials/_textField.mdx';
import StyledTextFieldPartial from './_partials/_styledTextField.mdx';

Text fields are used to allow users to input plain text into a form.

Text fields are implemented with the `input` element for single line of text or `textarea` element for multiple lines of text.

## Features

- Uses `input` or `textarea` elements as a base.
- Accessibility support for labels, descriptions, and error messages.
- Validation and error messages support with native HTML constraint validation or Typed schemas.
- Support for `v-model` binding.

## Anatomy

<AnatomyCanvas>
  <AnatomyTextField />
</AnatomyCanvas>

## Building a Text Field Component

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
import { ref } from 'vue';

const name = ref('');
</script>

<template>
  <TextField v-model="name" label="Your name" />

  <h2>Hello, {{ name }}</h2>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

<Aside type="caution">

Only `text`, `password`, `email`, `tel` and `url` types are supported at the moment for `input` elements.

The other types have their own composables, check out the following guides:

- Number field, check out the [Number Field](/guides/number-fields) guide.
- Search field, check out the [Search Field](/guides/search-fields) guide.
- No support for `date` fields at the moment.

</Aside>

## Building a Text Area Component

Instead of using a `input[type="text"]` element, you can switch to using a `textarea` element as a base element instead.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="TextAreaField.vue">
```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { type TextFieldProps, useTextField } from '@formwerk/core';

const props = defineProps<TextFieldProps>();

const {
inputProps,
labelProps,
errorMessage,
errorMessageProps,
descriptionProps,
} = useTextField(props);

</script>

<template>
  <div>
    <label v-bind="labelProps">{{ label }}</label>
    <textarea v-bind="inputProps" :style="{ display: 'block' }" />

    <div v-if="errorMessage" v-bind="errorMessageProps">
      {{ errorMessage }}
    </div>
    <div v-else-if="description" v-bind="descriptionProps">
      {{ description }}
    </div>

  </div>
</template>
```
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">
```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import TextAreaField from './TextAreaField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <TextAreaField label="Write a poem" />
</template>
```
</div>
</MdxRepl>

## Validation

### HTML Constraints

You can use native HTML validation or Typed schemas to validate the number field. The following properties are supported:

| Name        | Type               | Description                                                               |
| ----------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `maxLength` | `number`           | The maximum length of characters                                          |
| `minLength` | `number`           | The minimum length of characters                                          |
| `required`  | `boolean`          | Whether the text field is required.                                       |
| `pattern`   | `string \| RegExp` | A regular expression for validation. Not supported for `textarea` fields. |

In addition to the above properties, if you are using the `input` element, you can use the built-in validation for the `type` attribute.

| Type    | Description                      |
| ------- | -------------------------------- |
| `email` | Validates the value as an email. |
| `url`   | Validates the value as a URL.    |

<Aside>
  Note that `minLength`, and `maxLength` attributes accept a number or a string,
  the string however must be parseable as a number. Formwerk takes care of
  typing strings safely and parsing them so you don't have to bind the values as
  numbers.
</Aside>

Here is an example of how to use the `maxLength` and `minLength` properties to limit the text length between 3 and 18 characters.

Assuming you have a `TextField` component like the one shown above, you can use it like this:

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <TextField
    label="HTML Constraints Demo"
    maxLength="8"
    minLength="3"
    required
  />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Typed Schema

`useTextField` also supports Typed Schema validation through the `schema` prop.

<Aside>

Depending on the schema validation provider you are using, the API might slightly differ. Check the supported validation providers for more information. In this example we are using the `zod` schema validation provider.

</Aside>

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import TextField from './TextField.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(z.string().min(3).max(8));
</script>

<template>
  <TextField label="Typed Schema" :schema="schema" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Mixed Validation

All text fields created with Formwerk support mixed validation, which means you can use both HTML constraints and Typed schemas to validate the field and they work seamlessly together.

Note that HTML constraints are validated first, so any errors from the HTML constraints will be displayed first. Then once all HTML constraints are satisfied, the typed schema is validated.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import TextField from './TextField.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(z.string().min(3).max(20));
</script>

<template>
  <TextField label="Mixed Validation" :schema="schema" type="url" required />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

This makes schemas lighter, however we recommend sticking to one or the other per form for maintainability.

If you need to disable the native validation, you can do so by setting the `disableHtmlValidation` prop to `true`.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import TextField from './TextField.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(z.string().min(3).max(20));
</script>

<template>
  <TextField
    label="HTML Validation Disabled"
    disable-html-validation
    :schema="schema"
    type="url"
    required
  />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

You can also disable it globally for all fields, for more information check out the [Validation](/guides/forms/validation) guide.

## Styling

Formwerk does not come with any markup or styling, which is often the parts that make a design system unique. That means you can use any styling solution you want, whether it's [TailwindCSS](https://tailwindcss.com/), or plain CSS.

This is an example of how you can style a text field using plain CSS, we take advantage of native CSS pseudo-classes to style the field when it is focused, hovered, or has an error. No JS-state is needed to style the field.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="TextFieldStyled.vue">
  <StyledTextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import TextField from './TextFieldStyled.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <TextField
    label="Email Address"
    description="We will not share your email with anyone."
    type="email"
    placeholder="example@example.com"
    required
  />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

Notice that in the last example we made use of the `:user-invalid` and `:user-valid` pseudo-classes to style the field which are just some of the features available in all modern browsers. With no JavaScript we managed to show the error message when appropriate.

Formwerk leans into that to provide a more seamless experience for the user. In fact, even if you use Typed Schemas to validate the field, the pseudo-classes will still work. Here is a quick example with the same `TextFieldStyled` component, but this time we pass in a typed schema validation.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextFieldStyled.vue">
  <StyledTextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import TextField from './TextFieldStyled.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(z.string().email());
</script>

<template>
  <TextField
    label="Email Address with Typed Schema"
    :schema="schema"
    description="We will not share your email with anyone."
    placeholder="example@example.com"
  />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## Usage

### Disabled

Use disabled to mark fields as non-interactive, disabled fields are not validated and are not submitted.

If you need to prevent the user from interacting with the field while still allowing it to submit, consider using `readonly` instead.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <TextField label="Disabled Field" disabled />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Readonly

Readonly fields are validated and submitted, but they do not accept user input. The field is still focusable and the value is copyable. For more info, check the [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/readonly).

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <TextField label="Readonly Field" value="You can't change me" readonly />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### RTL

The text field doesn't really need much for RTL support, however the `dir` prop can be used to set the direction of the field for convenience.

There is a lot more to directionality and localization, for more info check out the [Localization](/guides/extras/i18n) guide.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <TextField label="RTL Field" dir="rtl" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## API

### Props

| Name                    | Type                                                            | Description                                        |
| ----------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| `label`                 | `string`                                                        | The label for the text field.                      |
| `modelValue`            | `string`                                                        | The v-model value for the text field.              |
| `description`           | `string`                                                        | Description text for the field.                    |
| `name`                  | `string`                                                        | The name attribute for the input element.          |
| `value`                 | `string`                                                        | The value attribute for the input element.         |
| `type`                  | `'text' \| 'password' \| 'email' \| 'number' \| 'tel' \| 'url'` | The type of the input element.                     |
| `maxLength`             | `Numberish`                                                     | The maximum length of the input.                   |
| `minLength`             | `Numberish`                                                     | The minimum length of the input.                   |
| `pattern`               | `string \| RegExp?`                                             | A regular expression pattern for input validation. |
| `placeholder`           | `string`                                                        | Placeholder text for the input.                    |
| `required`              | `boolean`                                                       | Whether the field is required.                     |
| `readonly`              | `boolean`                                                       | Whether the field is read-only.                    |
| `disabled`              | `boolean`                                                       | Whether the field is disabled.                     |
| `schema`                | `TypedSchema<string>`                                           | A schema for validation.                           |
| `disableHtmlValidation` | `boolean`                                                       | Whether to disable HTML5 validation.               |

<Aside>
  All the props above can be passed as `Ref<T>` or `() => T` and the reactivity will be handled for you.
</Aside>

### Returns

| Name                | Type                               | Description                                                         |
| ------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `descriptionProps`  | `AriaDescriptionProps`             | The description element's props.                                    |
| `displayError`      | `() => string \| undefined`        | A getter to display the error message if touched.                   |
| `errorMessage`      | `string \| undefined`              | The validation message.                                             |
| `errorMessageProps` | `AriaErrorMessageProps`            | The error message element props.                                    |
| `errors`            | `string[]`                         | The field's error messages.                                         |
| `fieldValue`        | `string \| undefined`              | The current value of the field.                                     |
| `inputProps`        | Complex Binding                    | The base element props.                                             |
| `isDirty`           | `boolean`                          | Whether the field value has changed.                                |
| `isTouched`         | `boolean`                          | Whether the field is touched.                                       |
| `isValid`           | `boolean`                          | Whether the field has error messages.                               |
| `labelProps`        | `AriaLabelProps`                   | The label element props.                                            |
| `setErrors`         | `(msg: Arrayable<string>) => void` | Sets the error messages for the field and sets the `isValid` state. |
| `setTouched`        | `(touched: boolean) => void`       | Sets the `isTouched` state.                                         |
| `setValue`          | `(value: number) => void`          | Sets the field's current value.                                     |

```

```

Commit message:

feat: finish the number examples

src/content/docs/guides/fields/text-fields.mdx, after:

---
title: Text Fields
description: A guide in my new Starlight docs site.
sidebar:
  order: 1
---

<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/@live-codes/browser-compilers@0.15.1/dist/vue-compiler-sfc/vue-compiler-sfc.js"></script>

import { Tabs, TabItem, Aside } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import AnatomyCanvas from '@components/AnatomyCanvas.vue';
import AnatomyTextField from '@components/AnatomyTextField.vue';
import MdxRepl from '@components/MdxRepl.vue';
import TextFieldPartial from './_partials/_textField.mdx';
import StyledTextFieldPartial from './_partials/_styledTextField.mdx';

Text fields are used to allow users to input plain text into a form.

Text fields are implemented with the `input` element for single line of text or `textarea` element for multiple lines of text.

## Features

- Uses `input` or `textarea` elements as a base.
- Labeling, descriptions, error message displays are automatically linked to input and label elements with `aria-*` attributes.
- Validation support with native HTML constraint validation or Typed schemas.
- Support for `v-model` binding.

## Anatomy

<AnatomyCanvas>
  <AnatomyTextField />
</AnatomyCanvas>

## Building a Text Field Component

You can start by importing the `useTextField` composable and using it in your text field component.

The `useTextField` composable returns binding objects for the elements shown in the [anatomy](#anatomy), you will use `v-bind` to bind them to the corresponding DOM elements.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
import { ref } from 'vue';

const name = ref('');
</script>

<template>
  <TextField v-model="name" label="Your name" />

  <h2>Hello, {{ name }}</h2>
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

<Aside type="caution">

Only `text`, `password`, `email`, `tel` and `url` types are supported at the moment for `input` elements.

The other types have their own composables, check out the following guides:

- Number field, check out the [Number Field](/guides/number-fields) guide.
- Search field, check out the [Search Field](/guides/search-fields) guide.
- No support for `date` fields at the moment.

</Aside>

Notice that we imported the `TextFieldProps` in the previous example. This is recommended to use as your component prop types.

Not only you get type safety for your component out of it but also it handles the reactivity aspects of the props so you don't have to. You are free to extend it with your own props or omit the ones you don't need.

## Building a Text Area Component

Instead of using a `input[type="text"]` element, you can switch to using a `textarea` element as a base element instead.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="TextAreaField.vue">
```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { type TextFieldProps, useTextField } from '@formwerk/core';

const props = defineProps<TextFieldProps>();

const {
inputProps,
labelProps,
errorMessage,
errorMessageProps,
descriptionProps,
} = useTextField(props);

</script>

<template>
  <div>
    <label v-bind="labelProps">{{ label }}</label>
    <textarea v-bind="inputProps" :style="{ display: 'block' }" />

    <div v-if="errorMessage" v-bind="errorMessageProps">
      {{ errorMessage }}
    </div>
    <div v-else-if="description" v-bind="descriptionProps">
      {{ description }}
    </div>

  </div>
</template>
```
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">
```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import TextAreaField from './TextAreaField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <TextAreaField label="Write a poem" />
</template>
```
</div>
</MdxRepl>

## Validation

### HTML Constraints

You can use native HTML validation or Typed schemas to validate the text field. The following properties are supported:

| Name        | Type               | Description                                                               |
| ----------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `maxLength` | `number`           | The maximum length of characters                                          |
| `minLength` | `number`           | The minimum length of characters                                          |
| `required`  | `boolean`          | Whether the text field is required.                                       |
| `pattern`   | `string \| RegExp` | A regular expression for validation. Not supported for `textarea` fields. |

In addition to the above properties, if you are using the `input` element, you can use the built-in validation for the `type` attribute.

| Type    | Description                      |
| ------- | -------------------------------- |
| `email` | Validates the value as an email. |
| `url`   | Validates the value as a URL.    |

<Aside>
  Note that `minLength`, and `maxLength` attributes accept a number or a string,
  the string however must be parseable as a number. Formwerk takes care of
  typing strings safely and parsing them so you don't have to bind the values as
  numbers.
</Aside>

Here is an example of how to use the `maxLength` and `minLength` properties to limit the text length between 3 and 18 characters.

Assuming you have a `TextField` component like the one shown above, you can use it like this:

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <TextField
    label="HTML Constraints Demo"
    maxLength="8"
    minLength="3"
    required
  />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Typed Schema

`useTextField` also supports Typed Schema validation through the `schema` prop.

<Aside>

Depending on the schema validation provider you are using, the API might slightly differ. Check the supported validation providers for more information. In this example we are using the `zod` schema validation provider.

</Aside>

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import TextField from './TextField.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(z.string().min(3).max(8));
</script>

<template>
  <TextField label="Typed Schema" :schema="schema" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Mixed Validation

All text fields created with Formwerk support mixed validation, which means you can use both HTML constraints and Typed schemas to validate the field and they work seamlessly together.

Note that HTML constraints are validated first, so any errors from the HTML constraints will be displayed first. Then once all HTML constraints are satisfied, the typed schema is validated.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import TextField from './TextField.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(z.string().min(3).max(20));
</script>

<template>
  <TextField label="Mixed Validation" :schema="schema" type="url" required />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

This makes schemas lighter, however we recommend sticking to one or the other per form for maintainability.

If you need to disable the native validation, you can do so by setting the `disableHtmlValidation` prop to `true`.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import TextField from './TextField.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(z.string().min(3).max(20));
</script>

<template>
  <TextField
    label="HTML Validation Disabled"
    disable-html-validation
    :schema="schema"
    type="url"
    required
  />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

You can also disable it globally for all fields, for more information check out the [Validation](/guides/forms/validation) guide.

## Styling

Formwerk does not come with any markup or styling, which is often the parts that make a design system unique. That means you can use any styling solution you want, whether it's [TailwindCSS](https://tailwindcss.com/), or plain CSS.

This is an example of how you can style a text field using plain CSS, we take advantage of native CSS pseudo-classes to style the field when it is focused, hovered, or has an error. No JS-state is needed to style the field.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="TextFieldStyled.vue">
  <StyledTextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import TextField from './TextFieldStyled.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <TextField
    label="Email Address"
    description="We will not share your email with anyone."
    type="email"
    placeholder="example@example.com"
    required
  />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

Notice that in the last example we made use of the `:user-invalid` and `:user-valid` pseudo-classes to style the field which are just some of the features available in all modern browsers. With no JavaScript we managed to show the error message when appropriate.

Formwerk leans into that to provide a more seamless experience for the user. In fact, even if you use Typed Schemas to validate the field, the pseudo-classes will still work. Here is a quick example with the same `TextFieldStyled` component, but this time we pass in a typed schema validation.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextFieldStyled.vue">
  <StyledTextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod';
import { defineSchema } from '@formwerk/schema-zod';
import TextField from './TextFieldStyled.vue';

const schema = defineSchema(z.string().email());
</script>

<template>
  <TextField
    label="Email Address with Typed Schema"
    :schema="schema"
    description="We will not share your email with anyone."
    placeholder="example@example.com"
  />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## Usage

### Disabled

Use disabled to mark fields as non-interactive, disabled fields are not validated and are not submitted.

If you need to prevent the user from interacting with the field while still allowing it to submit, consider using `readonly` instead.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <TextField label="Disabled Field" disabled />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### Readonly

Readonly fields are validated and submitted, but they do not accept user input. The field is still focusable and the value is copyable. For more info, check the [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/readonly).

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <TextField label="Readonly Field" value="You can't change me" readonly />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

### RTL

The text field doesn't really need much for RTL support, however the `dir` prop can be used to set the direction of the field for convenience.

There is a lot more to directionality and localization, for more info check out the [Localization](/guides/extras/i18n) guide.

<MdxRepl client:load>

<div slot="!TextField.vue">
  <TextFieldPartial />
</div>

<div slot="App.vue">

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import TextField from './TextField.vue';
</script>

<template>
  <TextField label="RTL Field" dir="rtl" />
</template>
```

</div>

</MdxRepl>

## API

### Props

| Name                    | Type                                                            | Description                                        |
| ----------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| `label`                 | `string`                                                        | The label for the text field.                      |
| `modelValue`            | `string`                                                        | The v-model value for the text field.              |
| `description`           | `string`                                                        | Description text for the field.                    |
| `name`                  | `string`                                                        | The name attribute for the input element.          |
| `value`                 | `string`                                                        | The value attribute for the input element.         |
| `type`                  | `'text' \| 'password' \| 'email' \| 'number' \| 'tel' \| 'url'` | The type of the input element.                     |
| `maxLength`             | `Numberish`                                                     | The maximum length of the input.                   |
| `minLength`             | `Numberish`                                                     | The minimum length of the input.                   |
| `pattern`               | `string \| RegExp?`                                             | A regular expression pattern for input validation. |
| `placeholder`           | `string`                                                        | Placeholder text for the input.                    |
| `required`              | `boolean`                                                       | Whether the field is required.                     |
| `readonly`              | `boolean`                                                       | Whether the field is read-only.                    |
| `disabled`              | `boolean`                                                       | Whether the field is disabled.                     |
| `schema`                | `TypedSchema<string>`                                           | A schema for validation.                           |
| `disableHtmlValidation` | `boolean`                                                       | Whether to disable HTML5 validation.               |

<Aside>
  All the props above can be passed as `Ref<T>` or `() => T` and the reactivity will be handled for you.
</Aside>

### Returns

| Name                | Type                               | Description                                                         |
| ------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `descriptionProps`  | `AriaDescriptionProps`             | The description element's props.                                    |
| `displayError`      | `() => string \| undefined`        | A getter to display the error message if touched.                   |
| `errorMessage`      | `string \| undefined`              | The validation message.                                             |
| `errorMessageProps` | `AriaErrorMessageProps`            | The error message element props.                                    |
| `errors`            | `string[]`                         | The field's error messages.                                         |
| `fieldValue`        | `string \| undefined`              | The current value of the field.                                     |
| `inputProps`        | Complex Binding                    | The base element props.                                             |
| `isDirty`           | `boolean`                          | Whether the field value has changed.                                |
| `isTouched`         | `boolean`                          | Whether the field is touched.                                       |
| `isValid`           | `boolean`                          | Whether the field has error messages.                               |
| `labelProps`        | `AriaLabelProps`                   | The label element props.                                            |
| `setErrors`         | `(msg: Arrayable<string>) => void` | Sets the error messages for the field and sets the `isValid` state. |
| `setTouched`        | `(touched: boolean) => void`       | Sets the `isTouched` state.                                         |
| `setValue`          | `(value: number) => void`          | Sets the field's current value.                                     |
